Grace, mercy, and peace be unto you from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
And again, a portion of the gospel reading this evening.
He came to her and said, greetings, O favorite one, the Lord is with you.
But she was greatly troubled at the saying and tried to discern what sort of greeting this might be.
And the angel said to her, do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
If you join me with a word of prayer.
Lord God, as we gather before you this evening,
as we draw closer to the celebration of your son's birth.
We give thanks for this season, the reminder to wait and to look and to watch, and also to know who this one who is coming is.
This Jesus, your own son, come into the world.
Tonight we see him as the true king, the one who follows in the lineage of David, but one who is the greater David, the one who can truly sit on the king and rule with justice and righteous and holiness for his people.
So lower, we ask that those gifts, those characteristics would come into our lives also, that your justice would fill us, your holiness would be with us, and that you would lead us on paths of mercy as we go through this world.
We pray all this now in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Congregation, may be seated.
The season of Advent is always a bit tricky to preach through and to plan sermons for, because
the well-known passages that we come across during the season are so well-known.
The story is so well-known and so often told, and so we go through the season always thinking about it at the beginning of Advent, what are the sermons going to be like, what are our Sundays going to be like, what are our Wednesdays going to be like, and especially as we think about Christmas Eve, which is a unique service because we have a lot of people who join us who aren't here every Sunday.
A lot of families are gathered together, people of all ages, including many
Many kids are here with us that evening.
And so some things that might work other times don't work for Christmas Eve, that large service.
And generally, we know people want to come and they want to hear a joyful telling of the Christmas story.
So doing things like a deep dive into the Greek grammar might not work on Christmas Eve, but maybe it could work tonight.
If we do slow down and take a look at this passage from Luke chapter one,
Of course, we know it, but there's a lot here that is still worth reflecting on, really slowing down and honing in on.
And what I believe we find here when we do that is that Luke chapter one, especially these verses of the angel coming to Mary, pronounce the good news that a Savior is going to be born, that she would give birth to a son.
In many, many ways, this is a reversal
of the curse that comes to mankind in Genesis chapter three.
Might not seem like it at first, but we'll see if we can put that together in the next few minutes.
So Luke one here, the angel comes to the Lord.
That's where this portion of the story begins.
The angel comes from God himself and invites Mary to come close.
So God is coming close to Mary.
Mary is coming close to God by this messenger, this angelic being who now comes to Mary.
He's bringing a message of good news, though she doesn't understand it at first, and though she has questions, she wants to know how these things will be.
It is a message of good news.
God is coming down in a new way.
He is drawing near to his people and first to marry herself.
If you go all the way back to Genesis chapter three, you have the fall,
You have the temptation of Adam and Eve.
You have the curses that are given because of the sin that they entered into, because they ate the fruit of the tree that God had commanded them not to eat.
And at the very end of that chapter, they are removed from the garden of Eden, chased out, and who is there guarding the gate?
What says there's a cherubim
and a flaming sword.
So there you have guarding the gates to Eden, to paradise and to the very presence of God.
You have a messenger of God, an angelic being of God, a cherubim who's there guarding the way.
You can't come in in your sinfulness and your fallenness as human people no longer permitted to enter into Eden, chased out, removed from the presence of God.
But here in Luke chapter one, now the angel's coming to Mary.
Now God is coming close, and God is inviting Mary to come close to Him.
So we see here at the beginning that this story is starting to unfold and the things that began to happen there at the time of the fall.
Genesis chapter three, maybe there is hope.
Maybe God's people can be invited back in again, maybe possibly somehow.
God and His people may dwell together once again.
The angel comes, Gabriel comes to a virgin betrothed to a man.
And this is significant as well.
A young woman, a virgin as it had been promised by the prophets, but also in every possible way, the last person that anyone would expect that God's promise of salvation would come to and come through.
In many ways, she's the wrong one because that's what the world would say.
They look at her and especially now a virgin, a young woman, a very young woman who's not yet married and she's going to become pregnant and have to carry a child and how are others going to look at her and what are they going to think about her and what will they say about her?
And yet this is the one that God chooses.
She's the wrong gender.
Women were not looked highly upon at that time.
She's the wrong age, not old enough, even hardly old enough to be married, let alone
have a child.
She's from the wrong family background.
She's from a small out of the way place, going to Bethlehem, a small out of the way place.
She's not anybody that anybody would make much of.
And significantly, she's the wrong marital status for having a child.
But again, remember back to Genesis chapter 3, the part of the curse that is spoken to the woman that you will have pain in childbirth.
and difficulty, a curse that is put upon humankind because the very act of bringing additional human people into the world of bearing children is going to be difficult and challenging and fraught.
And sometimes it will come with sadness as well.
But now in that very gift, the very thing that was once cursed, now a promise is given.
Now good news is coming.
Now a reversal is being made possible that the very act of childbearing.
Now this will bring good news to the world.
This will bring God's plan of salvation to his people.
So even there that curse that was once given is now becoming a promise.
The angel came to a young woman and told her that she would give birth to a son.
And not only that, but that she is highly favored.
One of the Greek words in there, it's a bit of a lengthy one.
The translation that we have of it in English is you who are highly favored or more literal translation, you who are favored with grace.
Keker Ito Mini.
Keker Ito Mini is the Greek.
You who are favored with grace.
But how can that be?
Isn't Mary like all other human people, one of the curse, one who is sinful, one who necessarily is far from God, one who cannot be given salvation even?
Because she like every other human person is plagued with sin and pride and selfishness and being made far from God.
And yet this is the greeting of the angel, you who are favored with grace.
And she's just the first one.
Because of Mary and because this gift is given to her, this will be now the promise for all of God's people.
You who are favored with grace, this is what the angels say as they come and they proclaim the good news from the heavens, God's peace to all people on whom his favor rests.
All people are now being favored.
Those who are once cursed, who are once far from God, who are once lost in sin, now again, favored with grace.
And only because of one thing, this gift that is given, a son is being born, a child is coming into the world who will be one who is going to bring some new pathway to knowing God and resting in God's presence and living in a new peace that only he makes possible.
And for me, the most significant word of all of this in chapter, in verse 35, if you want to take a look at it, you can.
We have the promise that's being given here is that the holy one of God is now being born of a woman.
This is what the angel says.
The holy one is who you're going to give birth to.
The holy one of God is now coming to you.
He will be called holy, the holy one.
But in that verse, the word that's used is Haggion.
And that word means holy.
And it doesn't say holy one.
A literal translation would be just the holy.
The holy of God is going to be born.
We were just talking in the Tuesday class this week about God's holiness.
And every time you encounter God's holiness in the Old Testament, it's sort of this thing for the people in the Old Testament, God's people.
They can't live without it.
They long for the holiness and the presence of God, but they also really can't live with it.
Because for sinful people, people who are fallen, people who are not holy, people who are finite, who are far from God,
Holiness is dangerous.
Holiness is problematic.
It's sort of like the radiance and the power and the warmth of the sun.
It is too much for human beings to bear or to handle.
And so in the Old Testament, whenever someone gets a little too close to the holiness of God, they are struck down.
It can cause damage to them.
It can end their lives in a moment.
And yet what the angel says to Mary is that being born to you is the holy
of God, the holiness of God.
The holiness of God is coming now to dwell in a woman is going to dwell within her in a very physical and literal sense.
And he will be called the son of God.
The holiness of God is now coming down is breaking through the barrier between heaven and earth is now going to be coming into a woman to dwell within her first, but then to be given to the world in childbirth.
This is Jesus Christ our Lord.
We praise and who we come to know during this season, the very Son of God being born into creation.
And finally, to not forget about Joseph, the man.
Much of this is about Mary and this gift, this promise that's given to her.
She is favored and chosen for this most important of works and jobs.
And she has lifted up high because of all of this.
But Joseph here is mentioned as well, verse 27, to a verge of betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph.
of the house of David.
Get the little inkling there that he does come from a royal house, and yet it's almost as if that royalty has been forgotten, Joseph, now far from David, far removed.
The one thing, and you remember the curse that's given to mankind, to men, to man, at the time of the fall, is that your work will be difficult.
Tending the ground will
grow up weeds.
You will struggle in the work that you do.
It's always been the case and one of the work that man has tried to do through the Old Testament is to draw close to God, to be close to God, to live up to God's commands.
It's the work of attempting to be holy like God and yet never able, never being able to do it.
But now here comes a new man going to live into that curse also so that even though our work
cannot save us.
Here is one who is coming whose work will save us, redeeming even the curse of work that is pronounced upon Adam.
Now Jesus in his work, in the things that he does, in his accomplishments, in his doing, in his going to the cross, and in his resurrection from the dead.
He brings about salvation for all mankind, all those who call on the name of the Lord.
So in so many ways here, for Mary,
for Joseph, for humankind, for childbirth, for the curse of work that has given in all of these ways, God is reversing the curse that was once spoken over humankind in the garden, the curse that chased them out of Eden, out of the perfect dwelling place of God, out of the place where they were made to live, and now by the grace of God and the work of Jesus Christ, now they are being brought back in, we are being invited back.
brought close to God through no work of our own, but by His work only.
And this is the gift that we celebrate in this season.
God and His love has seen fit to come down and to be with us, to be born of a virgin, to come into this world and walk with us, to show us His mercy, His grace, His comfort, to heal the sick, to raise up the lowly, and most of all,
who allow us to dwell in the presence of God once again.
He is the true king, the one worthy of our praise and our worship.
So I pray this season we see him, we receive him, and we praise him.
Amen.